Fitting data into types
=======================

The base feature of typefit is to fit data into Python data structures. By
example:

.. code-block:: python

    from typing import NamedTuple, Text
    from typefit import typefit


    class Item(NamedTuple):
        id: int
        title: Text


    item = typefit(Item, {"id": 42, "title": "Item title yay"})
    assert item.title == "Item title yay"

It will use typing annotations in order to understand what kind of data
structure you expect and then it will create an instance of the specified type
based on the provided data.

Fitting Enum
----------------

Typefit can also be used to fit data to an `Enum`.

.. code-block:: python

    from typefit import typefit

    class Color(Enum):
        RED = 1
        GREEN = 2
        BLUE = 3

    item = typefit(Color, 2)
    assert item == Color.GREEN

typefit will return the attribute of the enum class if the value is valid or else
it will raise a `ValueError` exception.

Fitting mappings
----------------

The concept is as simple as that but it can become pretty powerful. Firstly,
typing definitions can be recursive, so this would work:

.. code-block:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass, field
    from typing import List, Text
    from typefit import typefit


    @dataclass
    class Comment:
        text: Text
        children: List["Comment"] = field(default_factory=list)


    data = {
        "text": "Hello",
        "children": [
            {
                "text": "Howdy",
            },
            {
                "text": "Hello to you too",
            },
        ]
    }

    comment = typefit(Comment, data)

You'll notice that we switched from :class:`typing.NamedTuple` to a
`dataclass`. Both approaches work, that's up to you to decide which fits your
needs most.

.. note::

   This example uses a forward reference as type because the :class:`Comment`
   is not defined at the time we need it. This means that Python will have to
   be able to resolve this reference later, meaning that this class has to be
   importable. If hidden inside a 2-nd order function it won't work.

Custom field names
++++++++++++++++++

If you don't want your fields to bear the exact name as they have in the JSON
that you are deserializing, you can specify customized names:

.. code-block:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass, field
    from typing import Text
    from typefit import typefit, meta, other_field


    @dataclass
    class Info:
        some_thing: Text = field(metadata=meta(source=other_field('someThing')))


    x: Info = typefit(Info, {"someThing": "foo"})
    assert x.some_thing == "foo"

Parsing narrow types
--------------------

This system also allows you to parse input and coerce it into a more pythonic
object. A typical example for that would be to parse a date. Typefit uses
:code:`pendulum` in order to parse dates and will return a Pendulum date time
object.

.. code-block:: python

    from typefit import narrows, typefit

    data = "2019-01-01T00:00:00Z"
    date = typefit(narrows.DateTime, data)

    assert date.month == 1

.. note::

    Date narrow types depend on the ``pendulum`` package, however Typefit
    doesn't list it as a dependency. If you want to be able to use those, you
    need to install ``pendulum`` for your project.

Narrows are types that will help narrow-down the data you are parsing to a
Python function. Of course, you might not want to limit yourself to builtin
narrow types.

Custom type
+++++++++++

You can provide a custom narrow type simply by creating a type whose
constructor will have exactly a single argument which is properly annotated
(with a simple type like ``int`` or ``Text`` but not a generic like ``Union``
or ``List``).

.. code-block:: python

    from typing import Text
    from typefit import typefit

    class Name:
        def __init__(self, full_name: Text):
            split = full_name.split(' ')

            if len(split) != 2:
                raise ValueError('Too many names')

            self.first_name, self.last_name = split

    name = typefit(Name, "RÃ©my Sanchez")
    print(name.first_name)
    print(name.last_name)

Wrapper type
++++++++++++

However sometimes you just want to wrap a type that already exists but doesn't
have the right arguments in its constructor. That's the case of the
date-related narrows described above. Let's dissect one.

.. code-block:: python

    import pendulum

    class TimeStamp(pendulum.DateTime):
        def __new__(cls, date: int):
            return pendulum.from_timestamp(date)

You'll probably ask why is there some funny business with ``__new__`` instead
of just created a function that will parse and return the desired value. The
answer is that you're doing type annotations so you must provide valid types
otherwise you'll confuse your static type checker, which loses the interest of
annotating types in a first place.

Injection
---------

You might not want everything in your objects to be exclusively parsed from the
input but also provide some context so that methods implemented on each object
can actually interact with the outside world.

Context
+++++++

The first type of injection is context injection. Typically you'll start by
defining a field in your class that needs to be injected:

.. code-block:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass, field
    from typing import Text
    from typefit import typefit, meta

    @dataclass
    class Info:
        some_thing: Text
        other_thing: Text = field(metadata=meta(context='other_thing'))

        def do_something(self):
            print(self.some_thing)
            print(self.other_thing)


Then you can pass a context to the typefit function:

.. code-block:: python

    x: Info = typefit(Info, {"some_thing": "foo"}, context={"other_thing": "bar"})
    x.do_something()

Let's note that the context will be provided to all objects recursively and it
will not be fitted or anything.

A use-case for this for example could be to provide a database connection or
some kind of resource handler to all the fitted objects that need it so that
they can have methods of their own.

Root
++++

The second type of injection is root injection. This is useful when you want to
have a reference to the root object from your children. This allows them to
access the full tree and thus to see what happens in their siblings.

That can be useful for example if you parse a configuration file and each
object from this configuration file wants to access methods from sibling
objects to do some kind of validation or cross-reference.

Here's an example of how a child can access its siblings:

.. code-block:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass, field
    from typing import Text, List
    from typefit import typefit, meta

    @dataclass
    class Child:
        name: Text
        root: 'Parent' = field(metadata=meta(inject_root=True))

        def list_siblings(self):
            names = [s.name for s in self.root.children]
            print(f"Siblings are named: {', '.join(names)}")

    @dataclass
    class Parent:
        children: List[Child]

    family = typefit(Parent, {
        "children": [
            {"name": "Alice"},
            {"name": "Bob"},
            {"name": "Charlie"},
        ]
    })

    family.children[0].list_siblings()

Reference
---------

You'll find here the reference of the public API. Private function are
documented in the source code but might change or disappear without notice.
The current API is not stable but will try to change as little as possible
before version 1.

Typefit
+++++++

The core typefit module only exposes one function.

.. autofunction:: typefit.typefit

.. autoclass:: typefit.Fitter
   :members: fit, __init__

Narrows
+++++++

Narrows are data types that integrate some form of parsing to generate Python
objects from more generic types like strings. All those classes accept exactly
one argument to their constructor which is the data structure to convert.

.. automodule:: typefit.narrows
    :members:

Meta
++++

The meta module allows to specify meta-information on fields and types in order
to affect the way that `typefit` will deal with them.

.. automodule:: typefit.meta
    :members:
